Welcome to this lecture where we will solve a
practice problem on MSTs: min cost to connect
all points, it's the leetcode problem number
1584. We have a list of 2D points, and we want
to connect them, we want to have a path from any
point to any other point, knowing that the cost of
connecting two points is the Manhattan distance of
two points, given by this formula. The task is to
return the minimum cost to perform the connection.
For example if we have this input, the minimum
cost to connect all points is 20, by setting links
like this, you can see the cost of each link.
This problem reminds us of the problem of
connecting houses of a network through cables
with a minimum total length of cables, we talked
about it in the first lecture of this chapter.
Here we have the same problem but with 2D points
instead of houses, and links instead of cables.
What we did to solve that problem was to find
the minimum spanning tree of the network,
so we will do the same thing for this problem,
we want to find the minimum spanning tree
and return its sum of weights, because we're
searching for the cost and not the MST itself.
But wait, we don't even have a weighted graph,
we just have a list of 2D points, no edges and
no weights. In reality, we have a hidden graph.
Vertices are given points obviously. For edges, we
can have a link between any two points, so we can
think of it as a complete graph. And for weights,
we can calculate the weight of any edge by
calculating the Manhattan distance between its two
incident vertices. And from this complete graph,
we want to extract the minimum spanning tree and
return the sum of its weights. For that, we apply
one of the MST algorithms we learnt. And because
we have a complete graph, then it's very dense, we
should use Prim's algorithm instead of Kruskal's.
What we gonna do is to take the code we made for
Prim's algorithm and adapt it for this problem.
First we need a function manhattan that
calculates the Manhattan distance of two points.
Then in the generic algorithm we have as parameter
the graph, in this problem we don't have the
graph, we just have the list of points. We also
changed the function name. Question, do we have
to build the graph? The answer is no, we don't
need to build the graph as long as we know how to
access neighbors and how to calculate weights. And
we do, neighbors are all the points except itself
because we have a complete graph, and weights can
be calculated with the Manhattan distance formula.
What do we need to change in this code? First, as
parameter, we don't have a graph, we have the list
of points, each point is a vertex. We can add an
early exit condition here, if we have less than
2 points, then there is no connection, the cost
is 0, we return 0, it's to handle the edge case.
And because vertices will later represent
keys of hash tables we will use, we need
to make sure that a point is hashable. A point is
currently represented with an array of 2 elements,
and arrays are not hashable, this is why we
convert them to tuples, tuples are hashable.
Also, in this problem we're not
interested by the mst itself,
we're just interested by its total cost, this is
why we add a variable total cost initialized to 0.
For start vertex, we can just put the
first point of the list, points[0].
What can we also change? In the loop we need
to traverse points, we don't have a graph,
we write for u in points. And when we add the edge
in the mst, we also add the cost to total_cost,
it's what we're searching for. Also, neighbors
of u are just the points of our list,
and they don't contain the weight. So instead
of traversing the tuple (v, w) in graph[u],
we traverse points v, and for the weight,
we calculate it with the manhattan function.
Last thing to changed, instead of
returning the mst, we return total_cost.
And we adapted Prim's algorithm for
this problem. For the time complexity,
we're just applying Prim's algorithm, which
has an O(|E|+|V|log|V|) time complexity.
Here |V| is the number of points, n,
and |E| is in O(|V|²), which is O(n²),
because we're working on a complete graph. We
replace, and we get an O(n²) time complexity.
We've reached the end of this lecture, I hope
that you understood minimum spanning trees,
how to find them, and how we can use them to
solve a problem. See you in the next lecture!